---
title: An API with a Repository
summary:
authors:
    - Marc Puig
date: 2020-08-23
---

## Overview
We know how to build a very [simple API](00.up_and_running.md) with FastAPI and we also know 
how to use the [Repository Pattern](02.repository_pattern.md) to isolate repositories. Let's use them together to
create an API with three endpoints to create a new book, get all books, and get one book given an id.

For this test, we'll need to use a client to call the API endpoints, and for this reason, we need to add `requests` 
package to the requirements file:

{ git_diff_by_commit d93616eb..1c53eb32 -- requirements.txt }

and install it:

```commandline
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
## Example

First step, we need to create a new test file: 
```commandline
touch tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py
```

### Initial Test

Let's start with the more simple test: getting all books. To do it, we add an initial test:

{ git_diff_by_commit 697501fd..d93616eb -- tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py }


### First API Endpoint
 
To create the first API endpoint, we need to add a new route to handle the GET requests. Here we can see how to use
the dependency injection to load the in-memory repository to be used from the endpoint. 

{ git_diff_by_commit a14c7f2f..697501fd -- tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py }


### Create a New Book

Next step is to create a test to create new books, and implement the API route to handle POST requests. This endpoint
it also uses `Depends` to inject the repository.

{ git_diff_by_commit 59746680..a14c7f2f -- tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py }


### Test Invalid Data

Ok, now that we can add a new book to the repository using the API, we need to be sure that only valid data is used.
Let's add a new test to check that an attempt to create an invalid book returns an error code.

{ git_diff_by_commit c4d2696d..59746680 -- tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py }

It looks that everything works fine!

### Get by ID
 
Finally, we define a new test to check the get-by-id API endpoint, and we create the route for the new GET method.

{ git_diff_by_commit 6249be0a..c4d2696d -- tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py }

All green!

## Code Refactor
 
As we have seen in other cases, it's a good practice to move all the code different than a test to its own file, 
sometimes to the `conftest.py` and only for testing, and sometimes will be to other files to be able to reuse the code
when writing the app. In this case, we extract the fixture `app` that contains the simple FastAPI app with its routes, 
and also the ``client`` fixture, to do the requests. 

{ git_diff_by_commit 18cb09ec..6249be0a -- tests/test_03_api_with_repository.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit 18cb09ec..6249be0a -- tests/conftest.py }
