---
title: The Service Layer Pattern
summary:
authors:
    - Marc Puig
date: 2020-08-24
---

## Overview

If we look at what the [api with the repository](03.api_with_repository.md) endpoints are doing, we'll agree that 
are very simple. But what usually happens is that business applications typically require different kinds of interfaces 
(API, user interface, command line client, etc) to the data and the logic they implement 
(3rd party integrations, repositories,...). 

The same concept used in the [repository pattern](02.repository_pattern.md)
to create a common interface for the data, can be used to define a common interaction with the application to 
invoke the business logic: fetching data from the repository, validating inputs against current state,
handling errors, etc. And most of this things don't have anything to do with having a web aPI endpoint. 

This is what we might call _orchestration layer_ , _use-case layer_ or [_service layer_](https://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/serviceLayer.html).

 
## Example
To continue with our simple examples, we'll create a service to paginate results.

Let's start creating the test file, as usual: 
```commandline
touch tests/test_04_api_with_services_and_repository.py
```

### First Test and Dependency Injection 
To implement the service layer, we know that we'll need a mechanism to inject the in-memory repository to the service.
To do this, we define a function ``get_repo_test``  that returns an `InMemoryBookRepository` with a list of 
25 new books, that will be used to return paginated results.

The test, overrides the app dependencies with this repository, and do a request to a new endpoint, asking for a page of results. 

{ git_diff_by_commit 8f447f5..17f693f4 -- tests/test_04_api_with_services_and_repository.py }

Of course, this test fails, because the endpoint is not yet defined.

### Create Service and Endpoint

At this point, we can imagine that the new service will be used from other tests, and perhaps in the future, from a real application.
for this reason, we create it in a new file:

{git_diff_by_commit a5f556cd..8f447f5 - tests / services.py}

Since we have a ``conftest.py`` with an app fixture, we'll continue to extend it with the new endpoint, which uses the
previous service.

{ git_diff_by_commit a5f556cd..8f447f5 -- tests/conftest.py }

### Update Repository 

We need that our repository returns only the requested items. To do this, we modify the ``list`` 
method to accept pagination params:

{ git_diff_by_commit 1e216907..a5f556cd -- tests/repositories.py }

### Add Test for Invalid Values

We need to be sure that the system is as robust as possible, and that handle correctly invalid values for pagination requests.
Let's add a test to check invalid values, using the parametrized decorator:

{ git_diff_by_commit 8a5ba293..1e216907 -- tests/test_04_api_with_services_and_repository.py }


### Fix Code

With the previous test, we realize that some invalid input values are accepted. Let's fix it adding input data validation to the endpoint:

{ git_diff_by_commit 086db711..8a5ba293 -- tests/conftest.py }

All green!
