---
title: SQL Repository
summary:
authors:
    - Marc Puig
date: 2020-08-25
---

## Overview
A natural step in this journey, is to create a new repository, that uses the same interface that the 
current being used (in-memory repository), and see that everything continues working. So, let's create
an SQL repository, using the SQLAlchemy package to handle the database engine stuff.

To start, we need to add the SQLAlchemy package to requirements.txt
{ git_diff_by_commit fa666fa6..d19ec6eb -- requirements.txt }

and install it:

```commandline
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Example
With all the necessary updates done, we continue creating a new test file:

```commandline
touch tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py
```

### First test
Let's create an initial test, to create an sql repository and add a book. First of all, we define the 
``SQLBookRepository`` class, that inherits from the same ``BookRepository`` interface used by the `InMemoryBooksRepository`.
And then, we define the initial test.

{ git_diff_by_commit 4663f82b..fa666fa6 -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

### Database fixtures
To work with a real SQL engine, we need to manage sessions, connections, and a bunch of things that sqlalchemy makes easier.
We create a new fixture ``db_connection`` that creates a new instance of an sqlite engine in memory, and lasts for the entire test session.
And then, another fixture to create a db_session for every test:

{ git_diff_by_commit 25c9da65..4663f82b -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

### Create Database Tables
To work with an SQL engine, we need to define tables and column types. To do this, we use the ``declarative`` method of
sqlalchemy to create a new class ``Base``, from which all data models will inherit, and which can also be used
to create and drop all the database tables for each session.

{ git_diff_by_commit 0a60490e..25c9da65 -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

### Add a New Book 
Next step is to write the code to add a book to the database: 
{ git_diff_by_commit 38a4074d..0a60490e -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

### Get a Book
Let's write a test to fetch information from the database:
{ git_diff_by_commit d6fab0ba..38a4074d -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

And to implmemet the ``get`` method to make the test work:
{ git_diff_by_commit 4a341534..d6fab0ba -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

### Get Books List 
And finally, let's do the same for a list of books:
{ git_diff_by_commit 473fc454..4a341534 -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

## Code Refactor
With all the tests going green, we can do the usual refactors to move the Book Model to a new file `models.py`
 and the `SQLBookRepository` class to the existing `repositories.py`
{ git_diff_by_commit 616e5d59..473fc454 -- tests/models.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit 616e5d59..473fc454 -- tests/repositories.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit 616e5d59..473fc454 -- tests/test_05_sqlalchemy_repository.py }

That's all for now.
