---
title: Project Settings
summary:
authors:
    - Marc Puig
date: 2020-08-26
---

## Overview
For this new set of FastAPI tests, the goal is to create a basic ``Settings`` class to manage the configuration of an API project.
When you are developing in your local machine, you need some settings that are not the same than when the code is
on the development server, or production.

For this reason, one of the most widely used approaches to address this topic is to create different configuration files, one per environment.
And then, environment variables can be used to define which one will be used.

So the requirements for writing the configuration tests are:

- Read a local file with variables and load them into the Settings class.
- Control environment variables, and check whether are defined or not.
- Define which local file to be read, depending on the environment variables. 

A preliminary step is to add the ```dotenv``` package to the `requirements.txt` file. 
Given that this package is being used from pydantic, what we can do is to add both:  
 
{ git_diff_by_commit 263ff0aa..46e69855 -- requirements.txt }

and install it:

```commandline
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Example

The first step, as usual, is to create the python file to write the unit tests based on pytest.

```commandline
touch tests/test_06_settings.py
```

### Read Settings File

Everything is ready to start writing tests. Let's start defining 2 tests, to work from a local file:

- ``test_load_settings_from_file_successfully``
- ``test_load_settings_from_nonexistent_file_raises_exception``

These two tests use a new fixture, that creates settings file ``dummy.env`` into a temporal directory that lasts as long as the fixture scope.

And finally, we write a function that given a settings file path, it loads its content if exists, or raises an exception. 
And this time, we create a new and specific exception with this goal: ``ConfigFileNotFoundException``.
 
{ git_diff_by_commit 2e95d168..263ff0aa -- tests/test_06_settings.py }

We run the tests and we'll see that everything goes green :)

### Read Environment Variables

Next tests will be to see how we can check if a mandatory environment variable is defined or not. We write two new tests to do this:

- ``test_get_missing_mandatory_environment_variable_raises_exception``
- ``test_get_valid_mandatory_environment_variable_successfully``
 
and a new function that checks if the environment variable exists or not: ``get_mandatory_environment_variable``. 
To complete this function, we create a new customized Exception ``MandatoryEnvironmentVariableNotDefinedException``.

{ git_diff_by_commit 13400640..2e95d168 -- tests/test_06_settings.py }

### Read Setting Defined in Environment Variables 

Finally, we write two new tests, to load a settings file defined in an environment variable. 
This means that, for example, we'll get the value from the environment variable ```DUMMY_ENV_FOR_TEST``` to know which file to load.

To do this, we'll need a new fixture that creates a new temporal file ``dummy_test.env``
and also sets the environment variable ``os.environ["DUMMY_ENV_FOR_TEST"] = "dummy_test"``. 

Let's see it:
 
{ git_diff_by_commit 1ad6ccab..13400640 -- tests/test_06_settings.py }

Done! Now we can refactor the code as usual, extracting the new code to separate files, and make the code cleaner.

## Code Refactor

### Fixtures 
First things to move: the fixtures. We'll move all of them to the ``conftest.py`` file
{ git_diff_by_commit fd93bdc9..1ad6ccab -- tests/conftest.py }

### Exceptions
Another thing to extract are the new exceptions. We'll create a new file to move them:

{ git_diff_by_commit fd93bdc9..1ad6ccab -- tests/exceptions.py }

### Settings
And finally, we move the ``Settings`` class and its associated functions to another new file ``settings.py``

{ git_diff_by_commit fd93bdc9..1ad6ccab -- tests/settings.py }

The resulting test file is much more clear, and all the extracted elements can be reused in next steps.

{ git_diff_by_commit fd93bdc9..1ad6ccab -- tests/test_06_settings.py }
