---
title: The Repository Pattern
summary:
authors:
    - Marc Puig
date: 2020-08-23
---


Defining objects using [data schemas](01.data_schemas.md) is very useful to do field validations and be consistent along the code. 
Next step is to define a place where to store collections of objects, and this is done in repositories.

## Repository Pattern
The basics for the [Repository Pattern](https://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/repository.html) are:

- Define an interface for the repository.
- And then you could have as many implementations as you like

### The Contract
With this pattern, the important part is not how we implement the repository. The important thing is that all repositories
and the implementations respect the defined contract (interface) and all use the same methods.
Then we can implement controllers that no longer depend on a specific repository implementation.

Now all we have to do is set up a dependency injection framework to use the desired repository implementation.
The dependency injection framework manages the instances of the repository classes and "injects" them into the controller constructor.
And simply by modifying these settings we could change our data access technology without touching a single line of code in your controller.

### Complete Isolation.
And this is where unit testing comes in. Using this pattern allows us to isolate the different layers.
Since the controller code is loosely coupled to the repository, all we have to do in unit tests is
provide a mock implementation in the repository that allows you to define its behavior.
This gives us the ability to unit test controller actions without relying on a database or whatever.


### Advantages
Using the Repository Pattern has many advantages:

- Your business logic can be unit tested without data access logic.
- The database access code can be reused and is managed centrally, making it easy to implement any database access policy.
- It is easy to implement the domain logic.

## Example
Let's see it with a simple example:

First of all, let's create a new test file:
````commandline
touch tests/test_02_repositories.py 
````

### Create the Abstract Class

{ git_diff_by_commit 4909b360..3a48ae00 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

For this example, we'll create a very simple repository, that stores all the information in an in-memory dictionary.

### Write a Basic Test and Define Empty In-Memory Repository 

The first step is to create the initial test and the initial repository implementation, defining all methods:  

{ git_diff_by_commit 5df22763..4909b360 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

Then, we add the book dictionary variable to store all books: 

{ git_diff_by_commit 174d2c31..5df22763 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

### Implement all Methods from the Contract 

{ git_diff_by_commit c5d3d826..174d2c31 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

### Check that Added Books are Valid
We need to be sure that the implementation is as robust as possible. To do it, we write a test forcing to add a data
structure different than a Book, and we see that fails. Then we need to add some extra validation to the ``add`` method, 
just to check that the `new_book` is a `Book` type instance.
 
{ git_diff_by_commit 0bbc3585..c5d3d826 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

At this point, we get a new error, because we are using a class-level variable to store the books. This means that
all the of `InMemoryBooksRepository` shares the same variable. To solve this, we can do an optional initialization
of the ``self.books`` variable in the ``__init__`` method.

{ git_diff_by_commit 6992565c..0bbc3585 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

Add some extra tests to check the get function 

{ git_diff_by_commit 26f61591..6992565c -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }


## Improving Tests: Fixtures
For those tests, we have defined a fixture function to create new ``Book`` instances for test purposes. 
Given that we know that we'll need to do this again and again in future tests, what we can do is to move those fixtures
from ``test_02_repositories.py`` to ``conftest.py``. `conftest.py` file is loaded everytime we run a test. 

{ git_diff_by_commit e98659e4..26f61591 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit e98659e4..26f61591 -- tests/conftest.py }


## Code Refactor

### Data Schemas
And we also know that we'll use the `Book` data type in future tests, so we can refactor the data schemas 
from ``test_02_repositories.py`` to ``schemas.py``, to clean the code and make more usable. 

{ git_diff_by_commit 4628dfea..e98659e4 -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit 4628dfea..e98659e4 -- tests/schemas.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit 4628dfea..e98659e4 -- tests/conftest.py }


### Repository

{ git_diff_by_commit 6992565c..4628dfea -- tests/test_02_repositories.py }

{ git_diff_by_commit 6992565c..4628dfea -- tests/repositories.py }

